+++
title = "Scientific Method continued"
date = 2012-03-07T15:19:00Z
updated = 2012-03-07T15:23:25Z
blogimport = true 
[author]
	name = "Philosophy Field Course"
	uri = "https://www.blogger.com/profile/03689694800524747431"
+++

<div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">There once was a great chef who claimed to have a sure-fire recipe for baking great cakes.&nbsp; The chef constructed his recipe by carefully watching the cake-baking procedures of other great chefs in his native country of Austria. &nbsp;Chef Popper --that was is name-- argued that anyone who followed his recipe would be guaranteed to bake a great cake. &nbsp;Amazingly, Chef Popper’s recipe was also extremely simple. &nbsp;Just three instructions: (1) get ingredients, (2) mix ingredients, (3) place in oven. “A Monkey could bake a great cake using my recipe,” Chef Popper would sometimes say, “so long as it follows the recipe precisely.” &nbsp;Soon after, other great chefs from around the world agreed that, indeed, Chef Popper had nailed it. “That is exactly the recipe I use when baking great cakes in my country,” other chefs would exclaim, “more or less” (they would sometimes add). &nbsp;</span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">I concocted this little story because I think it helps to illustrate where we seem to be disagreeing.&nbsp; Obviously Chef Popper hadn’t provided a recipe, because all of the important details about how to bake cakes are missing. &nbsp;Let me now explain why the HD “method” is just like Chef Poppers “recipe.” &nbsp;</span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">Consider a simple example of science in action. Let the hypothesis be that average global temperature has increased over the past century by at least two degrees.&nbsp; Let the prediction that one derives from this hypothesis be that the average space between tree rings will have increased over the past 100 years in trees that are at least 130 years old. Now, suppose that we go out and core some 130 year old trees to test this prediction. Lo and behold, we find that there is no change in the average distance between tree rings in our sample: the observation “falsifies” the hypothesis. </span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">Should we reject the hypothesis on these grounds? Of course not! &nbsp;Instead, we identify a questionable auxiliary assumption that was implicitly used to derive the prediction. Let the auxiliary (background) assumption be that, in our sample, soil quality did not change over the past century. &nbsp;If soil quality did change, then we would not necessarily expect tree ring distances to increase. This leads us to conduct a new experiment on soil quality in our original sample of trees. And so the process goes. </span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">&nbsp; </span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">“But that’s just the HD method!” you might claim. No, it is not.&nbsp; If you are inclined to say this, you are like the chef who thinks that Chef Popper is describing your recipe. The reason that the process I just described is not the HD method (under any guise) is because it is not a&nbsp;<i>method</i>. Let me explain why.</span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">Any hypothesis depends on a huge number of auxiliary hypotheses in order to derive a prediction. Importantly, by “derive” I mean&nbsp; deduce according to logical rules. This is important because we are trying to come up with a method (recipe) that anyone (monkey?) could follow.&nbsp;&nbsp; </span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">To derive, logically, a prediction from a hypothesis, thousands of other (background) assumptions must be in place.&nbsp; For instance, take the derivation: if average temp has increased by 2 degrees, then there should be an increase in the distance between tree rings in the sample population. To do this, one must &nbsp;also assume that: </span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal; text-indent: -0.25in;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;</span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal; text-indent: -0.25in;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; * The sample had roughly stable nutrients for the last century.</span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal; text-indent: -0.25in;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 7pt;">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; &nbsp;&nbsp; </span><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">* The sample was exposed to stable atmospheric gasses.</span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal; text-indent: -0.25in;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 7pt;">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; </span><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">* The earth did not undergo a major shift in rotation around the sun.</span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal; text-indent: -0.25in;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 7pt;">&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; </span><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">* Climate change deniers did not tamper with the evidence.</span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">&nbsp; &nbsp; etc. </span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">Now, some of these auxiliary assumptions strike us as ludicrous (or at least highly unlikely). But that is part of the point that I am trying to illustrate. The reason that some of these auxiliary assumptions strike you as silly is because you know better – you have what I referred to as discipline specific knowledge in my previous post. </span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">Remember that the name of the game is to come up with a method, the analog of a recipe, that allows one to do good science (or distinguish good from bad science). I am claiming here that in order to do good science, one must know which auxiliary assumptions are reasonable to question in the face of evidence that conflicts with one’s predictions. &nbsp;The person who tests whether the earth underwent a major shift in rotation, for example, is not doing good science.Since the list of auxiliary hypotheses is indefinitely long, one cannot simply test them all. </span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">Tom argues that Popper's contribution (the philosopher, not the chef) was to identify falsifiability as the mark of science. But that can't be right, because <i>any</i> hypothesis can be rendered unfalsifiable with the right sort of tweaking to auxiliary assumptions. One can always cling to a cherished hypothesis in the face of conflicting evidence by raising questions about the auxiliary hypotheses instead. That is why falsifiability is not an adequate criterion for distinguishing good from bad science.&nbsp;</span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">In practice, of course, we do not let people get away with indefinite amounts of tweaking to background hypotheses. Sometimes a scientist will hold onto a hypothesis in the face of conflicting evidence; other times she will reject it. The important point is that nothing about the HD method enables one to make these judgments.&nbsp; How one makes these judgments depends on the information available about the system in question, the range and nature of the assumptions informing one's study, the prevailing theories, etc. That is what I meant when I said that if you want to know how a science works, look at how it deviates from &nbsp;the HD method. In other words, to understand a science, look at which hypotheses are rejected and which are retained in the face of conflicting evidence. </span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">In my earlier post I called this as “discipline specific” knowledge. Karl seems to have mistaken me for saying that one has to be initiated into a discipline in some formal sense in order to acquire discipline specific knowledge.&nbsp; He imagines trying to test some sociological hypothesis (I think it was a hypothesis about the tendency for ecologists, unlike most other scientists, &nbsp;to be wedded to the HD model). Nothing is preventing him from trying. Nothing is preventing me from trying to bake a cake with Chef Popper’s instructions. &nbsp;Let me know how that works out for you though.&nbsp;</span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">&nbsp;&nbsp;</span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">The important point is this. To have a method is to have a recipe.&nbsp; Chef Popper’s instructions were not a real recipe because they do not provide a set of step by step instructions for baking a great cake.&nbsp; Similarly, Philosopher Popper did not provide a scientific method. He also did not provide a set of instructions that are adequate for doing science well. &nbsp;One of the reasons why Philosopher Popper’s instructions are inadequate is because they do not tell you which background assumptions are reasonable to question when predictions are not borne out. There is NO discipline-general method for making these decisions. </span></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><br /></div><div class="MsoNormal" style="line-height: normal;"><span style="font-family: &quot;Times New Roman&quot;,&quot;serif&quot;; font-size: 12pt;">I should add that the only original bit of philosophy here is the story. Philosophers of science have recognized these limitations in the HD "method" for decades. I reckon that we have just done a poor job of explaining its limitations to other disciplines. I fear that I might not be doing much better. </span></div>
