+++
title = "The fallacy of our misunderstand of the scientific method"
date = 2012-03-02T11:05:00Z
updated = 2012-03-02T11:05:11Z
tags = ["science", "teaching and learning"]
blogimport = true 
[author]
	name = "Karl Cottenie"
	uri = "https://plus.google.com/116634918193112072853"
+++

Ryan Norris via Tom Nudds sent me a <a href="http://edge.org/annual-question/contributors/responses/what-have-you-changed-your-mind-about-why">link to this web site</a>, and I think all three of us had the same "What the ..." reaction after reading the entry by Irene Pepperberg, titled "The Fallacy of Hypothesis Testing":<br /><blockquote class="tr_bq">"I was trained, as a chemist, to use the classic scientific method: Devise a testable hypothesis, and then design an experiment to see if the hypothesis is correct or not. And I was told that this method is equally valid for the social sciences. I've changed my mind that this is the best way to do science. I have three reasons for this change of mind."</blockquote>These three reasons are:<br /><br /><ul><li>the importance of observations, without explicitly testing hypotheses</li><li>testable hypotheses are not interesting</li><li>the scientific method often leads to proving a hypothesis, not testing it</li></ul><div>These three reasons point out some major misunderstandings of the scientific method (see <a href="http://www.cottenielab.org/2011/06/natural-history-basis-of-interest.html">this post</a>, or <a href="http://www.cottenielab.org/2011/11/embryo-or-screen-writing-of-scientific.html">this post</a>)&nbsp;:</div><div><ul><li>the context leading up to the hypothesis-prediction-test (the question, background information, etc.) forms an essential part of the scientific method</li><li>the discussion of results (the information increase that leads to the next cycle) also forms an essential part of the scientific method. This is exactly what she points out "...&nbsp;the exciting part is a series of interrelated questions that arise and expand almost indefinitely".</li><li>this is a general misunderstanding that Dr Peppenberg correctly identifies. But this is not a reason to dismiss the method, but more a call for better education.</li></ul><div>We always tell our students that a full understanding of the scientific method, despite its apparent simplicity, is actually more challenging than it looks like. And now we can point them to this article, because this is a successful scientist from one of the best universities in the world (Harvard), who has a very limited idea of the scientific method.</div></div><div><br /></div><br />
